# Kalzit version 0.11.0 - Changelog

Look at that, another version of Kalzit! It's not every day that you see one of those.
If you wanted to set a theme for this release, it would probably be "easier development" - that is because many things are easier to do for developers now, which should hopefully result in much better Kalzit apps.
The good thing for normal users is that some of these things directly lead to a much better end-user experience as well. Here is one of those:

## Much better installer
This is literally the first thing you ever do with Kalzit: you install it. Would it not be great if the installer worked well? Well, that is one step closer now! Let me explain:

Kalzit is a project that depends on many other pieces of software - it uses third-party programs to manage networking, package websites into compact files, and download internet content, for example.
In previous versions, all of these dependencies were managed by a single installer script, which tried to automatically install them.
However, that approach lead to a few problems. Firstly, it was not always easy to know which dependencies were already registered and which were not (the installer script could get rather big and messy). So some dependencies were missing, which lead to strange behavior.
Secondly, it was not at all easy to prompt the user to install a dependency manually. That was necessary in some cases, because some programs can apparently not be installed automatically in a reliable way.
And thirdly, that entire dependency installation was hard-coded into one file. This is not a very smart approach, because that code is harder to read and to manage than a collection of smaller installation scripts. So here is wat was done to resolve those problems:

* There is now a unified system for adding a dependency to Kalzit. We have the `installer/parts/dependencies` folder for that. In there, you can find numbered folders (0 and 1). Folder 0 contains data about dependencies which have to be installed before those in folder 1, so you can put them in order.
* Each dependency can have an installer script for all Unix systems (`sudoInstaller.sh`), or specific ones for Linux and Mac (`sudoInstallerLinux.sh` or `sudoInstallerMac.sh`). If no matching installer exists for the current platform, you can also have a file `installHint.txt`, which contains a description that tells the user how to manually install that dependency.
* Whenever you add a dependency to the `installer/parts/dependencies` folder, it will automatically be respected by the main installer script, so it is now very easy to add new dependencies. Since they are all put into their own folders, it is also very simple to manage later.

If you are a user of Kalzit, these changes mean that you will probably have a much better time installing the project than you had before. Which is good, because first impressions are always important.

Okay, so now let's move on to some more developer-related things:

## Library handling
One huge part of making programming easier are libraries. Basically, you can use them to reuse code, so you do not have to re-invent the wheel all the time. Libraries are often more helpful than the programming language they are used with, so they are very important.
Recognizing this, I wanted to make working with libraries in Kalzit a lot better than it was before. Let's start with the first step to achieve that:

### Utility to automatically integrate libraries and apps on your system
There is now a utility which helps you to detect Kalzit apps and libraries that you have on your system. If you run the `./cli run automaticLinker <folder path to search in>` command, that tool will automatically make all the found libraries available to you. The next time you build your stuff (`./cli build everything`), they will just be available to your apps.
This means that you can literally download an API repository from anywhere and use that command to make it usable. You should also be able to just put the library into the `./APIs` folder and build.
I do not even want to go over how complicated this kind of stuff was before, but it is a lot better now.

### Utility to create new APIs
Now, you might be wondering how to create a library yourself.
This release of Kalzit makes it a lot easier than before - you just use another little utility command! The command would look something like this:
`./cli new library <library folder> <short library id>`. This takes care of all things that need to be done in order to make the new library available from any app.
Also, it will add a little guide to that library folder (`LibraryGuide.md`) so you know what to do next and how to maintain your library.
I think these two new utilities (for creating and integrating libraries) will make development much easier and encourage API creation - which would be very welcome.

### Libraries can now specify a target platform
When you decide to create a new library, you can decide if it is supposed to be used on the server (back-end) or in the web-browser (front-end).
If the library supports both, you do not have to do anything special. But if it provides functions that work with files, you would probably not want it to be available inside of a browser app.
How do you make this clear to Kalzit? You just edit the `platform-packages.json` file of your library, which was automatically created. It has a little section called `info`. Simply add a new field to that, called `platforms`:
```
{
    "info":{
        "description":"Library that works on the server",
        "platforms":["nodejs"]
    }
...
}
```

You can put `"html5"` instead of `"nodejs"` to make the library browser-only. Then you just use the standard build command (`./cli build everything`) and everything should be fine.

That would be the most interesting changes regarding library creation and setup. But there are several other new language features as well. Here are the most important ones:

## Language
### JS errors during library loading show up in the console
Sometimes, a library can be broken. In these cases, it would be nice to have the ability to figure out what exactly is the problem.
With this release of Kalzit, you can at least take a look at the JS stack trace at the point of failure, so you might find the problem. 
In previous versions, that was not possible - the library would fail to load silently.

### Added an error when a non-defined variable is used
This is pretty self-explanatory, but also very important. You can no longer use non-defined variables in Kalzit code.
Changes like these probably mean that some code will break, but the benefit is worth it: it is a *lot* easier to debug your code now.
Non-defined variables were actually a pretty common source of bugs that were kind of hard to debug, so that is now a lot easier - and it will likely make you write better code.

In case you are wondering how to check for the existance of a variable - that is what the `isDefined` function is for. You can use it like this:
```
!if (isDefined: $someVariable) {
    `we can use someVariable here`
}.
```

## New APIs (selection)
As you read above, APIs are very important. Here are the most interesting additions:

### uiListView does now respond to list changes
In many cases, it can be useful to work with lists. They are a very useful data structure.
But there is one thing that can be extremely annoying, which is representing the state of a list in a graphical way. You have to take care of so many things! For exaple, you have to make sure that you always update the UI when the list changes, and that you never update the UI without changing the list.
With this release of Kalzit, when you use the `uiListView` function to show a modifiable list in the UI, any changes to the list are immediately reflected in the user interface - so you do not have to worry about updating it manually.
This can save a lot of time, and it makes list views a lot easier and more predictable to use. Essentially, the main problem with displaying lists should now be solved - and you can still use the `uiListView` function the same way you did before:

```kalzit
$myList = ModifiableList: "Some";"Stuff".
print: !uiListView myList -> {
    `We generate the UI for each item here`
    uiContainer: x. `Just displays the text`
}.
```

### New folder listing functions
When you are writing a script with file access, you might want to iterate over the contents of a folder. In previous versions, there was the `folderContentAsync` function for that, and `folderContentDeepAsync` if you wanted to use the files inside nested folders as well.
The problem is that there are some cases where you do not actually want to go through everything that looks like a file, or where you do not want to go deeper into everything that looks like a folder. If a file is hidden (when the name starts with a dot) or when there is a link to something instead of an actual file or folder, you may not be interested in that.
So there are now functions for iterating folders that let you ignore these things. You can use `folderContentDeepAsyncNotHidden` to ignore hidden files, or `folderContentDeepAsyncNotLink` to ignore links. If you want to ignore both, use ` folderContentDeepAsyncNotLinkOrHidden`.
(I know the names are really long, but at least you know what the functions are supposed to do).

### New download APIs
Last, but not least, are new download APIs. In previous versions, you could download things if they had a URL - like a media file, for example.
This is the classic kind of download, but certainly not the only one. You might want to download content that has no URL - like text, for example. If you wanted to write a text editor and give the user an option to "save" the text as a file, you would want to "download" text.
Or maybe you want to have some kind of debug log that you create in the background, and you want the option to save it to a file - here, again, you would have to "download" it.

In order to enable something like this, two new functions were added: one to download text (`downloadText`) and one to turn text into a data URL (`strToDataUrl`). The `downloadText` function is very simple to use:

```
!downloadText "File content" "fileName.txt".
```

`strToDataUrl` is a bit more technical - it can turn a string into a data URL, as the name suggests. Data URLs are useful for many things, and maybe there will be more functions like this added in the future, but this is it for now.

## End of the changelog
Hey, you have made it through this thing! How nice of you - it means that you care about this project in some way.
If you do, feel free to let me know about any suggestions you might have. You can just mail me at oplpublishergerman@gmail.com, it would be very much appreciated.

As usual, I hope you have fun with Kalzit! Thank you again for reading, have a good day.
