# Kalzit 0.12.0 Changelog
This version of Kalzit is one with many nice features, but I want to focus on the big ones only.
So, without further ado, here are the three biggest features of this release:

## More complete installer
The changelog for Kalzit version 0.11 already included a section about a better installer, which was meant to fix a lot of bugs and make the installation experience much more seamless.
Well, as you might have noticed (but probably not), it did not really achieve that goal.
While the technical side of the installer got a lot better last time, you, the user, did not really notice that.
So this time, I tried to polish the installer. I say "tried" because this can only be made certain after publishing the release and installing from the internet. But the results of the tests I did so far are very promising.

Essentially, the installer does now do its thing without any problems. In most cases, not much manual action is required. If you are on macOS (Intel) or a Debian-based Linux (with the apt package manager), you just need to type your administrator password once, and the other stuff should be automatic. 
If you are on another Linux distribution, you should be prompted to install some dependencies manually and then restart the installation. In case you are using a Mac without an Intel processor, please make sure to install NodeJS before installing Kalzit - after that, everything should be automatic as well.

Here are some more technical changes for those who are interested:
* Added support for package managers to the installer (every dependency description can now support installation scripts for any package manager)
* Added an apt installer to the ffmpeg dependencies
* Upgraded the installer to install NodeJS on Mac
* The installer script should now quit if it detects a missing dependency (used "source" instead of "bash" to run certain files - this allows the exit command to quit the entire process, not just one part)

I hope the installer will finally work well now.

## A user logout does now remove all locally stored data
A big part of Kalzit is its ability to be used as home server software.
With previous Kalzit versions, you could log in to your user account and some of your data would be downloaded to whatever device you were using.
But when you logged out, these pieces of data were not deleted. So you could click "log out" in a hurry, leave the device on, and someone else could walk up to it and see your personal stuff, which is obviously not ideal.
So in this release, that problem was solved. When you log out now, all the pieces of data that were downloaded locally are deleted.
This is also true for automatic logouts. If an app notices that your user session has expired, it will delete your data from the device that tried to use the expired session. For example, if you restart your server, all sessions expire automatically.

Features like that might be able to get you a little more piece of mind, which is a good thing.

## Way better debugging
The second big part of Kalzit is the Kalzit programming language. A thing about programming languages is that they somehow always become annoying. One major reason for this is that programmers, myself included, make silly mistakes - because we are human - but the programming language does not *tell* us that we made a mistake.
A program with silly stuff in it might run just fine, but it can be horrible to work with later. It would be good to prevent these mistakes from happening, right? At least we should be aware that they are happening.
This is exactly what these debugging features are about. Not finding bugs, but *preventing* them. Here is a list of some of the hints that developers will get now:

* An error when a block closing character is used without an opener: `1+2)`.
* A console warning when a deprecated value is called - indicates that you should replace an implementation with something newer
* A console warning when a new value you assign to a variable (not the initial one) is implicitly changed by the data type of that variable: `$var ? Int = "1". (reference: $var) = "2.5"`
* A console warning about bad variable names (one letter): `$a = 6`
* A console warning when you define a variable in a scope, but a variable with the same name already exists in a higher scope: `$name = 1. do: {$name = 2}`

If you want to see these messages in a compact list, just open the developer tools of your browser while running a Kalzit app and filter the console messages to only show warnings.
Another helpful thing is that Kalzit web apps are now run in a discrete scope. So you can never replace global variables by accident, and you get a lot more freedom when it comes to name choices.

These changes should hopefully help you to make better apps and have more fun coding.

## End
As I said, these are not all the changes that were made in this version - for example, I did not mention that the server does now automatically do storage management to try to always give you enough disk space.
But anyway, you have made it through this changelog! I tried to keep it a bit shorter this time, so it is not as much to read.
Feel free to let me know about any suggestions you might have, or any problems you encounter. You can just mail me at oplpublishergerman@gmail.com, it would be very helpful.

If you have read this entire thing, I really appreciate it. Thank you! Have a good day.