# Kalzit 0.14.0 Changelog
This release of Kalzit has a rather small number of new features, but the new things themselves are pretty interesting.
However, two of them are sort of unfinished; they are the groundwork for features that will hopefully be added later. Let's just start with the first one:

## Automatic upload encryption
Kalzit is home server software as well as a programming language. The home server part is for people who do not really know what they are doing, but they want a private server.
With this target audience, built-in security is obviously important. Also, there is no "the user should have known better" argument here. If the server software is not secure after the initial installation, the right answer is *not* that the user should fix it - as the maintainer of this project, I should.

One problem I attempted to solve with this version is data theft. And since the most straight-forward solution was encryption, this was implemented.
Essentially, every time you upload a file to your server, it is encrypted. This happens in three steps right now: first, the unencrypted file is written to the server, and then the uploaded file is encrypted. After this, the unencrypted file is deleted.
Now, some people might argue that this approach is not that much more secure than a system without encryption - and they are right, a lot of things have to be done to make it more secure. But as stated above, this first step is just the groundwork.
The file encryption in its current form exists to test if the feature works well enough with low-end hardware and if it has any unintended side effects. It also protects your files from (most) thieves who get your physical Kalzit server somehow. If you use a Raspberry PI, for example, they could probably take out the SD card and see what is on there - but as far as your uploaded files are concerned, they would only see encrypted files.
Anything else would require more skills than the average user (and probably the average thief) has, so there is at least a small security benefit.

From the perspective of a user, basically nothing changes because of the encryption. It, as well as the decryption when someone needs to access a file, is fully transparent and happens in the background. There is no need to enter passwords all the time, for example - this would be way too annoying.

## Version "publishing"
Some people might install Kalzit on a computer with multiple user accounts on it, and they might tinker with the installation. With the earlier versions, this was a bad idea - as soon as someone broke something, it was broken for all users. And this was probably the least harmful problem.
From now on, the Kalzit project is suitable for multi-user systems. Every user has their own copy of Kalzit now, so when someone breaks something, this only breaks the one copy. There is also a way to roll back to a functioning version with relative ease.
To make this work, a system was added which is now called "publishing" - for lack of a better name. You can [read more about it by clicking here](/docs/projectInstallationLevelsPublishing.md).

The idea is that you can now have Kalzit installations in different places. To make it easy to find them, there are now  utilities to get each of the possible root folders: `./cli get ` with the options `systemRootFolder`, `localRootFolder` and `userRootFolder`. Also, the installer does now set up a "system" and a "user" installation automatically. The command collection surrounding "publishing" will be expanded later.
This new system with multiple installations in different places is probably not fully stable yet, but it seems to work well enough. Anyway, this is a zero-dot release, so do not expect everything to work - even though it probably does somehow.

## Arrow syntax update
The third change I want to mention has to do with the Kalzit programming language.
Version 0.10 introduced an [arrow syntax](/docs/changelog/0.10.0#arrow-syntax) to the language, which made certain pieces of code much easier to read:
```kalzit
$items = 1;2;3.
!loopEach items -> {
    print: x
}.
```
But what if we tried to change that code into something like this:
```kalzit
!loopEach 1;2;3 -> $item fun {
    print: item
}.
```
This looks like it should work, right? Well, in previous versions it did not, but now it does! Basically, everything between the function (`loopEach` in this case) and the arrow is considered to be one thing - as if it was put in brackets. Everything from the arrow to the dot is also one thing. So now you do not have to worry about brackets - your code will probably just work as you think it should.

There is another change: you can now no longer use the arrow syntax *without* the exclamation mark. In previous language versions, you could write something like `"Hello" -> print` (no `!` anywhere), but this syntax was very unhelpful and made code difficult to understand. It introduced some rather weird behaviors to the Kalzit language, so now it is gone for good.

## Smaller features and fixes (selection)
* Tweaked the modifiableObject API to allow key deletion
* Fixed a bug where a busy server could cause an app to reload
* Added a `$remove` function to `modifiableObject` (respects both key and value, good for multiple equal keys)
* Changed the app id of "ide" to match its folder name

# End
Hey, you made it to the end of yet another changelog!
As always, if you have any kind of suggestion or problem, feel free to E-Mail me at oplpublishergerman@gmail.com, it would be very much appreciated.  Or you could open an Issue on GitHub.
Anyway, I hope you have fun with Kalzit! Thank you for reading, have a good day.