# Version 0.16.0

Hey, a new version of Kalzit is here! You probably know what that means: new features, bug fixes and a fair bit of cleanup.

But there is something else that might be interesting to you:

## About this (near-final) version

This version of Kalzit is a very special one, because it is likely to be the last one with big feature additions. Essentially, the project is done now - both the programming language and the server are working acceptably well.

Why is this not version 1.0, then? Because I want to wait until the existing bugs are fixed. Since this is a software project, bugs are very likely to exist. But with this version, Kalzit is finally usable as a home server for basic use. There will be bugs, but there should not be too many. If you find one, please open an Issue on GitHub - it will be fixed as soon as possible.

With that said, let's jump to the major new feature of this release:

## Files app

This release of Kalzit includes a new default app, which is called "Files". As the name suggests, you can use it to upload files to your server, and you can also use it to view or download them. And you can create folders.

With this new app, the Kalzit project is now usable as a home server - at least for some people. It definitely is a lot better with a default file management app than it is without one.

If you want to, you can just give the app a try - as soon as you open your server URL (like http://localhost:5000), it should open. This is another new feature: usually, the server homepage resembles a phone home screen. But when you have only one app, the files app opens - because that is the only app on your server, meaning you probably want to use it. Just a nice little addition to save you an extra click.

The other changes in this release are probably not too exciting for most people, so I wrote them down in a simple list. If you want to read more, here you go:

## Removal of unneeded features

Here is a list of things I removed because they did not fit the project goal, or because they are no longer needed:

* Removed everything that has to do with GZip files
* Removed the support for .md files (Markdown)
* Removed encryptUserFolder.txt
* Removed api/languageJson
* Removed the "api/documentation" server handle
* Removed the creation of "nogit/cache" from the installer
* Removed "nogit/sites" from the installation
* Removed the Internet-based server handles, other than "loadUrl"
* Removed the "speedtest" utilities
* Removed the deprecated utility "cli get usedHashesFromUserFolder"
* Removed "globalMobileTools"
* Removed browser-side "runCommand" function
* Removed "pmAddLanguage" and "pmLoadPackage"
* Removed several http server functions that were not needed
* Removed "defaultCookieBanner" and associated string assets
* Removed the deprecated "pxFontSize" annotation
* Removed the remainders of ".redirect" files



Also, a few more things are now deprecated:

* Deprecated the `of` function; replaced it in all APIs
* Deprecated some old "rss generation" functions

## Improvements and cleanup

### Speed and code quality optimizations
* Changed `uiKmpListItem` to only use one default icon, not four
* Changed the "ide" app so that the documentation links to GitHub
* Replaced `!getAppId` with `appId` in all APIs
* Simplified `getAppId`
* Added a library exclusion list to the "home" app
* Switched the argument order of `buttonTool` to be easier to remember (the action callback is now the first parameter)
* Simplified the `strings` function
* The server does now assume the existence of a HTTPS certificate; it is created during installation
* Added a `loopEachAsync` function for non-blocking loops
* Optimized `objFirstProperty` for speed

### Fixes
* Attempted to fix a bug where the "need break" button would not always lead to a reset timer
* Fixed a bug with the storage API that prevented some values from being pushed to the server
* Fixed a bug with "./cli new app" where the app was not built
* Update "allButNogit" to actually ignore the entire nogit/ folder
* Attempted to fix the Issue where the standard apps were not found

### Other

* Re-built the documentation files
* Prevented the "kalzit" command from running as root
* Added a documentation about backing up the server

## End

You made it to the end! As always, thank you for reading. I do not have a lot to write here, so... Just have a good day!
