# Version 0.17.0

This release of Kalzit is rather small and mainly about bug fixes, so if you don't care about those, do not read any further. For everyone else, here you go:

## Fixed var(--kv-background_color) in dark mode

Kalzit has a CSS stylesheet with many variables, one of those is --kv-background_color. It is meant to always hold the color value used for the page background.

In previous versions, this was not true. In dark mode, the stored color was still white. This bug is fixed now.

## Removed everything having to do with "xmldom" and "markdown"

This is pretty self-explanatory. Previously, Kalzit had the NodeJS libraries "xmldom" and "markdown" as dependencies. This is no longer the case.

## File and folder deletions are now reflected in the UI (Files app)

With the last release of Kalzit (0.16.0), a file manager was added to the project, and it had a few bugs and oddities. For example, when you deleted a file or a folder, you did not actually see it go away. That was very confusing. In this version, you get instant feedback - as soon as the deletion is done, the file vanishes visually.

## Fixed a bug where app building did not work in the .kalzit folder

This is a rather important change. Previously, the process of building a Kalzit app involved replacing the `.k` file extension of the source file with `.json` to automatically generate a needed configuration file. But with the last few Kalzit versions, the entire thing was installed in a folder called `.kalzit`. So the replacement ran and made the folder name into something like `.jsalzit`, which was obviously not ideal. This bug is now fixed as well.

## Fixed a bug where the "optimised" tree generator included doc comments

Kalzit behaves a little bit differently on a Website (client-side) and on the local device (server-side). The server runtime has access to documentation comments, which can be useful to generate documentation files. On a website, this is not really needed and it would make the page bigger and slower.

Essentially, the documentation comments should not be included in the finished websites which Kalzit generates. The last version had a bug which included them anyway. As you might have guessed, this problem is also gone now.

## Made the "ide" app much more usable on mobile

This is not really a bug fix but rather a nice little addition. When you are using a mobile device (tabled or smartphone), you are likely familiar with auto-correct. This is a nice feature in general, but it is pretty hindering when you are trying to write code. So in this version, autocorrect was disabled for the "ide" app. This is really convenient when you are trying to test out an idea on a mobile device.

There is also a new annotation which can be used like this `@(autocorrect false) textInput`. You can use it to enable or disable autocorrect.

# End

As I said earlier, this is not the biggest or most exciting release of Kalzit, but it is still a step in the right direction. Thank you for reading this changelog and for being interested in this project. Have a good day!
