At the moment of writing this (June 6, 2020), the Kalzit project does not have any unified way for naming releases. That is why the date is included here.

This release is not really a big one. The reason for its existence is simple: I wanted to create a new little app and needed some new features for that which might be useful to others.

But, as with any software project, there were also a lot of bugs to fix - so we will start with that:

# Fixes

## Custom libraries are used if standard ones are not excluded
In Kalzit, there are two main ways to create an application right now.
The first one is very simple - just add a file with the `.k` file extension to the [apps folder](/apps) and you did it.
Because it is so easy to do, this way is preferred for new developers or smaller apps.

However, if you want to do something bigger, you can use the [project setup script](/setupProject.sh#).
Fore those of you interested, here is the command line code: `bash ./setupProject.sh where/you/want/your/files appId`.

But the script itself is not the point here. The point is that you are supposed to get many benefits from making an app project, including these two:
1. You can add custom libraries, just for your project and nothing else
2. You can exclude all the standard libraries you do not need, which can make the resulting webpage smaller and faster.

This sounds ok, but only if it works - which it did not do in the last release ([2020.05.05](2020.05.05.md)).
If you wanted to add your own library files without excluding at least one standard library, your custom library files were ignored.

In this version, you can have custom libraries without first excluding a standard one.


## Made name unification work as intended
One of the features that set Kalzit apart from other programming languages is name unification.

Most programming languages care a lot about the way you write names.
They make a big difference between `helloWorld`, `hello_world`, `HELLO_WORLD` and `HelloWorld`, for example - even though most humans reading these names would think that they reffer to the same thing.

As you might have already guessed, in Kalzit these names do just that - you can use all of them to reference the same value.

While that might seem logical to you, it is not so easy to tell a computer which names are the same and which ones are not. For example, you would probably expect `firstOne` and `firstOnE` to reference different things.

Now to the bug: In the last version, names like `pi` and `PI` were considered to mean different things (they were unified to `pi` and `p_i`). In this version, they mean the same thing (unified to `pi`).
If you want to learn how exactly name unification works, take a look at [the code for it](/core/files/variableScope.js) (The interesting part starts at line 32).


## Fixed many problems with error handling
Error handling is a topic that has long been ignored in the development of Kalzit.
That is because the Kalzit programming language was made to be error-free: No function should ever throw any kind of error.

However, since there is a way to implement code in JavaScript - which allows you to throw errors - that assumption is very hard to verify.
So, what do you do with an error in a language that does not know about errors?

Well, in earlier versions, errors would cause any app to just stop, with a stupidly long and vague crash report. The intent to show a useful error message was there, but you could never really learn anything from these reports.

So, in short, errors had these problems in the last release:
* The crash reports were unintelligible
* The crash itself would bring the entire app down
* They could not be handled in any way

With this release, all of these problems do not exist anymore. That is because crashes are now handled in a new way:
Whenever a crash happens, an error message is shown on the screen - same as before. However, the error does now have the potential to be much more detailed, and it can even include things like function scopes. Previously, the opposite was true - most error messages were not able to be shown *because* of the function scopes.

 There is another difference as well: A JavaScript function which throws an error does still return a valid Kalzit value. That value is equal to `void` - it indicates that there is no useful result, which is always true for errors. The return values do have an `"error"`-annotation as well, which contains the error message. That means you can potentially check for errors and handle them.

A last thing: Even though errors are much less annoying now, it is still best if your code does not throw any.


## A registered sub-app does no longer open on a page reload
All parts of your app which a user can navigate between can be represented as sub-apps.
You can have exactly one sub-app open at the same time - if you open one, the one that was previously open closes.
This principle is most commonly used for popups - take a look at the [images app](/apps/igDemo.k) if you are interested in a practical example (the relevant parts would be line 91 and 95).
The biggest benefit of sub-apps is that the user can navigate between them with the default back- and forward-buttons.

In previous versions, sub-apps had the ability to reopen if the user reloaded or restarted the main app. While this might sound nice in theory, there were at least two problems with it:

* You could never really rely on when a sub-app was opened. For example, most sub-apps would open before the toolbar of the main app was shown - leading to a popup with the standard app toolbar above it. Obviously these kinds of bugs are bad.
* The user would have to know which sub-app was open to understand what happened. But most users probably do not remember that. For them, the reopening seems like just a random popup that might open at the start or not - for whatever reason.

These two issues lead to the removal of this feature. Whatever sub-app was open before, it will never reopen if the user reloads the page.


## Fixed a scrolling bug in Firefox (uiStringListEditor)
The `uiStringListEditor` and `uiStringListEditPopup` functions provide a relatively nice and visual way to modify a list of strings. It allows you to get an overview of the items inside the list, to add new ones, and to remove old ones.

A quick usage example could look like this:
```
$myList = "abc";"def". $myListRef = reference: $myList.

$onAddition = $newItem fun {
    myListRef = myList;newItem.
}.
$onRemoval = $removedItem fun {
    `Nothing special here`
}.

print: myListRef uiStringListEditPopup onAddition;onRemoval.
```

If you want to test it, just save that in a `.k` file, put it inside the apps folder, and run it like you run any Kalzit browser app.

In the last version, that already worked fine with most browsers. Firefox (on the desktop) was the only exception - with that, the list of items would not be able to scroll if it got to big; it would outgrow the popup instead and look ugly.

With this version, the string list editor does work in Firefox as well - without being buggy.

Another thing about sub-apps: you can now use `!getCurrentSubApp` to get the ID of the one that is currently open.


## Added installation of "uglifycss"
Kalzit uses the default three client-side languages for the Web: HTML, CSS and JavaScript.
Because there is very much JavaScript and CSS code in every Kalzit app, this code is minified - that means that the user's device has less work to do, which makes the app faster.

There are many great tools for that job, and the ones chosen for this project are [terser](https://www.npmjs.com/package/terser) (for JavaScript) and [uglifycss](https://www.npmjs.com/package/uglifycss).

`terser` was already part of the installer script in the last version, but `uglifycss` was not.
You might have guessed it - if you install this version, uglifycss is installed as well. Yay!

# New features

## Registration option on login screen
If you have used the [images app](/app/igDemo), you have probably noticed the user icon in the upper right hand corner.
This icon is used to show a login screen, so you can easily login to an account and synchronize your data.

That feature worked well, but it was very hard to create a new user account.
This version makes that experience at least a little less bad: If you enter the login panel, there will be an option to register a new user.
If you select that option, you get to the registration app.

Admittedly, the registration app looks very ugly - but at least you can find it now. It will probably be made prettier soon.

## API for dropping data
You can now make any UI element handle dropped data with the `onDrop` annotation.

A code snippet for detecting that a user dropped something could look like this:
```
$myUiElement = `Some UI element you create`
    @(backgroundColor red)
    @(pxWidth 100) @(pxHeight 100)
        uiContainer: ().

print: 
    @(onDrop {
        `Happens if the user dropped something`
        popupMessage: "Something was dropped - how fascinating"
    }) myUiElement
```

Of course, you might want to work with the dropped data, rather than just detecting that something was dropped.
This can be done as well:

```
@(onDrop $_droppedData fun {
    $droppedText = $text of _droppedData. `Just a normal string`
    $droppedFiles = $files of _droppedData. `A list of file objects`
}) myUiElement
```

The structure of a file object is explained below in a little more detail. Check out the section about the [more advanced file picker](#more-advanced-file-picker) for more information.

## iOS Safari treats apps as standalone if an iOS.png icon is provided
Webpages can do much more than just show text and hyperlinks - Kalzit is just one example for that.
For one, webpages can look like they are actual phone or tablet apps - including a home screen icon and, most importantly, they do not have to show the browser controls.

Kalzit does now enable you to write this kind of "standalone" app, at least for iOS (Android will hopefully follow soon).
The way you do this is actually relatively easy:

1. Create an app project with the `setupProject.sh` script, similar to this: `bash ./setupProject.sh where/you/want/your/files appId`
2. Create an `icons` folder inside your project, and add an image called `iOS.png` - this is used as the home screen icon.

That is it! Now, if you build your app (you can use the `build.sh` file in your project for that), your app will behave more like a native app on iOS.

Of course, you might want to be careful with this feature.
For example, you need new ways to close popups (sub-apps in general), because standalone apps on iOS do not have a back button.

Since this is a known problem, there is also a solution for that - just take a look at the next two new features!

## Added variables that tell you if you are in an  iOS or Android standalone app
Your app can now tell if it is running as an iOS standalone app, or as an Android standalone app.
The way to do this is very straight forward:

```
!if (isIosApp) {print: "I am an iOS standalone app"}.
!if (isAndroidApp) {print: "I am an Android standalone app"}.
```

## Added a "close" button and title toolbars (for popups)
As mentioned above, there needs to be a reliable way to close sub-apps without having a back button. Here is the solution for that:

When creating a popup, you can simply add a title bar at the top:

```
print: uiPopup: 
    [uiTitleToolbar: "My title"];
    otherUiElements
```

The title bar will then show your title. But it will also show a close button (`X`) if you are running in an iOS standalone app.
By pressing that, the user can easily close any open sub-app, without you having to do more work.

By the way, the toolbar height should be exactly `toolbarCmHeight` centimeters high - you can use that variable in your code if you need to.
Also, most standard popups (like the login panel, the string list editor or the one that opens if you tap the hamburger menu on your phone) do now have these title bars as well.

# Improvements

## More advanced file picker
Websites can have the ability to let the user pick a file from their local disk.
For example, if you were writing an app for viewing images, you could use a file picker to let the user choose an image file.

In the last versions, there existed very specific file picker implementations. You had these options:

* `uiFilePickerPathVariable` let you see the file name, but not the file content
* `uiFilePickerContentTextVariable` let you see the file content as text, but you could not get the file name or type
* `uiFilePickerContentUrlVariable` let you see the file content as a data URL, but you could not get the file name.

This was kind of problematic. If we go back to the image-viever example, how could you verify if the user chose an image file? There was no way to do this.

Now, there is a much more advanced file picker implementation.
It is simply called `uiFilePicker`, because it combines and enhances the functionality of the other three.

The chosen files (yes, you can now accept multiple files) are represented as objects which contain a few pieces of information about each file.
Say you want to do something with the text content of a file, but only if it is actually a text file. This is how you could do that:

```
print: uiFilePicker: $_pickedFiles fun {
    $firstFile = first of _pickedFiles.
    
    `check that it is a text file`
    !if ("text/" strStartsWith $mime of firstFile) {
        `get the content`
        ($textAsync of firstFile): $textContent fun {
            `Do your thing here - this will just open a popup for now`
            popupMessage: textContent
        }
    }
}
```

As you can see, the way files are handled was completely rethought.
Currently, the `uiFilePicker` and `onDrop` APIs are the only ones that utilize this object-based approach for files, but the other file-based APIs should follow.

## Made the "apps" button visible for non-developers
This is a simple one.
In any app that uses the `uiGlobalToolbar` function to display the main toolbar, there is now a new button which allows you to quickly switch between Kalzit apps.
This button existed before, but it was only visible in "dev mode". It is now visible for all users.

## Made opening sub-apps by mobile tools a lot easier
As you might now, you can use the `registerMobileTool` or `registerLabeledTool` functions to register a menu option for mobile devices.
This option will be shown if the app is running on a narrow screen, and if the user then taps on the hamburger icon in the upper left hand corner.

These tools would be implemented in a way similar to this:
```
$toolFactory = {`Your tool implementation goes here`}.

`One way:`
toolFactory registerMobileTool "Label".

`Another way:`
"Label" registerLabeledTool
    ["mobile";toolFactory].
```

In previous versions, there were two different kinds of tools:
1. The tool factory could return `void` - in this case, all open sub-apps would be closed
2. The tool factory could return another value - in that case, that value would be displayed in a popup.

That implementation made it very hard to make such a tool open another sub-app.
That is because in both cases, the currently active sub-app was changed *after* the factory ran.
So even if the factory function changed the active sub-app, it would be changed again and have no real effect.

Because of this issue, there is now a check for this: If the tool factory changes the active sub-app and returns `void`, it is not closed anymore.
This allows you to write code like this: `{openSubApp: "thing"} registerMobileTool "Label"`.

## Documented many more libraries
Many libraries are now much better documented than before, and some others are marked for removal (with a `"deprecated"` annotation). The list of documented libraries includes these ones:

* The storage API (Written in JavaScript / JS)
* The HTML5 Media APIs, including speech, `uiVideoPlayer` and `uiAudioPlayer` (JS)
* The default navigation buttons ("apps", "account", hamburger menu)
* The Instagram APIs

I am aware that the documentation is still incomplete, but I am working to fix that problem.
Also, there is currently no easy way to integrate the documentation of libraries written in JavaScript (marked above) with the [docs app](app/docs). This problem should be solved as well.

## Many more sites have titles now
It is a small but important thing.
For example, if you open a Markdown file, it has a nice title which shows in the browser tab.
The [language playground](/app/ide) and the [home app](/app/home) will now show a title as well.
This addition will hopefully make the user experience a bit more polished.

# Plans for the future?
There are currently three planned versions of the Kalzit project which should be released sooner or later.
You can learn more about the planned changes for the specific versions. The versions are:

* "4.3" - [The next smaller release](/docs/future/4.3.md) is supposed to be the next one which goes public.
* "4.x" - [All plans until the next big release comes out](/docs/future/4.x.md)
* "5.0" - [The next big release](/docs/future.md) with many nice end-user features.

Thank you for reading this to the end - have fun with this project!