At the moment of writing this (May 5, 2020), the Kalzit project does not have any unified way for naming releases. That is why the date is included here.

Before you read any further: this document contains many links. Most of them only work well if you are reading this on GitHub.

Oh, and in case you want to find the new features yourself: Most of them can be discovered by simply starting the Kalzit server and opening [http://localhost:5000/](http://localhost:5000/).

---

Now, this is where the changelog begins.

This release is not really a big one. It mainly exists because a crucial bug existed, which prevented the server from running some Kalzit applications correctly.

That leads us to the first point of this changelog:

# Fixes

## The server did not run .k apps in the /apps folder

With Kalzit, creating an application is supposed to be very simple. You just add a file called "yourApp.k" to the [apps folder](/apps), which contains your source code. As long as you keep the .k file extension other names are OK too, but I needed an example.

Then, you should be able to navigate to a URL like `http://localhost:5000/app/yourApp` and the app should run.

This behavior was not present in the last release (May 1, 2020). If you tried to use the way shown above with that version, you would always see a blank page.

This bug had the potential to make the initial experience with Kalzit very confusing for people, which is why it had to be fixed quickly.

## With some requests, the server tried to run files that did not exist

The last release introduced a feature called "custom languages", which allows you to tell the server how to handle certain file extensions. Simply add a language implementation to the [server languages folder](/nodejs/files/server/languages).

That feature worked well (and still does) with files that were actually there. However, the custom language implementation was called even if the requested file was not present. Which created these two problems:

* The language runner files are based on the assumption that the file they are trying to run exists. If it does not, that could have many bad consequences - from simply giving an ugly result to potentially crashing the server.
* The server itself was supposed to answer with a `404` page if the requested file did not exist. That feature did not work with file extensions that had custom language implementations. So the server would show the potentially wrong result of the language runner to the user.

Both of these problems should be fixed now. The server checks for file existence *before* attempting to run a file, even if a custom language exists to run it. If the file does not exist, a 404 page is returned. Otherwise, the server runs the file and returns the result.

## The server ignored the blacklist sometimes

Again, this has to do with custom languages. When a file was supposed to be run using a language runner, the server did not check with the [blacklist](/nodejs/files/server/blacklist.txt) to see if it should serve that file.

This could easily have caused the execution of unwanted code, so it was another bug that needed quick fixing.

# New features

## Markdown support

Because the custom server-side languages work as intended now, I made the server support markdown files as well. Markdown is a simple and user-friendly way to format text that is very popular, so Kalzit does support it now.

This feature relies on the `markdown` command, which is automatically installed with Kalzit now - so you do not have to worry about it.

What this feature does is simple to explain: You place a markdown file anywhere in the Kalzit folder and navigate your browser to it, and it should be displayed with correct formatting. 

You can use the [readme file](/README.md) to test this yourself, or anything inside the [documentation folder](/docs).

## Better documentation for GitHub users

GitHub is a place that hosts many, *many* coding projects - which you probably know if you are reading this. This makes it a good way to browse through projects, take a quick look at them, and decide if you want to use them or not.

Now, what was the first thing a GitHub user saw if they wanted to inform themselves about Kalzit before downloading it?
Well, the README hopefully looked fine, but as soon as they got to the documentation and clicked on a link, they were greeted with an ugly piece of HTML code. Not a normal webpage - just the code of a webpage.

This is obviously not a very compelling first experience, so it got much better now.

If you look at the documentation folder on GitHub, you will see Markdown files with links to each other. The documentation actually looks decent now! And because the Kalzit server supports Markdown, it can still be seen and used with that too.

If you want to take a look at it (even though it is still incomplete), [here you go](/docs).

## Server-side shell scripts

This a feature that new programmers might enjoy. You can now create your first simple website with just a shell script. Even if you do not have a usecase for it now, it is fun to try.

Maybe you want to serve a simple list of files that exist inside a directory, and you know the `dir` command as a way to do just that.

Then you can simply go into the Kalzit folder and add a file like `listFiles.sh`, which has the `dir` command written inside it.

If you navigate to a URL like `https://localhost:5000/app/listFiles.sh` then, you see a website with your file list! Why make it any more complicated than that?

Oh, and if you - for whatever reason - want to generate HTML code using a shell script and have it rendered by the browser, that should work as well.

For those interested: This feature uses the `bash` command to run `.sh` files.
If you would like to change that, you could easily change the [custom language implementation for .sh files](/nodejs/files/server/languages/sh.k) to use another command.

## Documentation app

One of the goals for the next big release was to make the documentation of the standard library easier to find and use.

Previously there was a page called `/docs/api/home` which gave you a huge list of many of the functions that are provided by the Kalzit [standard library](/APIs).
You would probably never find it, and the path is not exactly easy to remember.

This list did not look good, and it was very hard to find anything. I usually used the search feature that is built in to most browsers. Anyway, that was not really a good experience.

The new [docs app](/apps/docs/docs.k) solves some of these problems.

First of all, it is very easy to access. It is an app called `docs`, so you can run it by visiting an URL like this: `http://localhost:5000/app/docs`. If you do that, you get a list of all available APIs that your Kalzit server knows about.

Second, the list is now easily searchable. If you ran the app already, you probably noticed the search field at the top. Just type a part of a function name inside that, and you will see only the available names that match it.

So, as an example, if you are looking for a way to get the first line of a string, you could write `first` into the search field and get a list of three results - that is much, *much* easier to look through than the original list.

And third: The entire thing is a little less ugly, becaue it does now use the default application styling. Do not get me wrong, it is still not pretty - but at least not as ugly as before.

## Home app

Here comes the user-centric stuff! Maybe some readers waited for this.
If you want to know why this is at the bottom of the changelog: that is because this is a small release. With the next big release, all features a casual user cares about will hopefully be shown in a more prominent way than this.

Most people reading this will probably be familier with the concept of a home screen from their phones. Well, now Kalzit does have a home screen too.

The home screen is a place to see what apps you have installed on your Kalzit server, and you can use it to easily open them.

To get to the home screen, simply navigate to the base URL of your Kalzit server - like `http://localhost:5000/`. That should do the trick. Of course, because the home screen is a normal app, you can also use `http://localhost:5000/app/home`.

On the home screen you can currently see three apps. Two of these are the [playground](http://localhost:5000/app/ide) and the new [documentation app](http://localhost:5000/app/ide) (these links will only work if you have a Kalzit server running on your device). The playground existed for a long time, but you always had to remember how to get to it. Not anymore!

## Images app

This is the third app on the home screen.

You know, another plan for the next big release was to include at least two user-centric applications. One of them was supposed to show how Kalzit can work with media from the internet.

That is exactly what the images app is. You open it, and you see an initially empty window with a toolbar. You can now click the `Edit` button, and you get a popup with a textfield.

Here, you can enter a URL to a YouTube channel, a public instagram account, or a reddit feed. The app will look for images there and show them to you.
If you close the app and open it again, your image sources should even be saved.

I do not think that this app needs much explanation - just try to use it. If you have any problems with it, please tell me.

# What is next?

If you have read this entire changlog, or even just this last section, then you are probably interested in Kalzit. To which I want to say thank you - any person interested in this is one good reason to continue developing it.

Now, I think there are enough links in this document that show you where you can see the latest changes, and how you can use them to your advantage.

However, if you want to see what is coming up for the next release, then you might want to [click here](/docs/future.md) to see the plans for the future.

Anyway, I hope you have fun with this project. Have a good day :)
