At the moment of writing this (June 24, 2020), the Kalzit project does not have any unified way for naming releases. That is why the date is included here.

# Fixes
## Error messages from the "load" functions
One of the many nice features in Kalzit is how easy the programming language makes it to access internet resources.
At the foundation of all the internet-related stuff (social media access, searching the web and some others) are these four functions:

* `loadLocal` to synchronously load a resource from the server that hosts the app
* `loadLocalAsync` to do that asynchronously
* `loadGlobal` to synchronously load a resource from any public web server
* `loadGlobalAsync` to do that asynchronously

In this section, only `loadLocal` and `loadGlobal` will be important.
A little thing that makes these functions (and also many others) so nice is that you do not have to deal with errors.
I mean, of course there are many reasons why getting a resource from a server might fail.
However, what does that really mean for the developer? It just indicates that there is *no result*.
In Kalzit, *no result* is represented by an empty list `()` or `void`, which has the same value.
The nice thing is that basically all functions can cope with `void` when they get it as their parameter.
Here are two little examples for that, in case you are not familiar:

```
`This function accepts a single text value`
$withText = !fun ($text ? String) {
    print text.
}.

withText: "Test1". `Prints Test1`
withText: void. `Does nothing and returns void`
withText: "A";"B". `Prints A and then B`

`Example with loadGlobal`
`If a useful result is returned, that is printed as text`
`If not, nothing will be done`
withText: loadGlobal: "https://example.com".
```

```
`This function accepts a list of strings, where ["My text"] is the default`
$withList = !fun ($_list ? (["My text"] default List:String)) {
    print each _list.
}.

withList: "Test1". `Prints Test1`
withList: void. `Prints My text (the default value)`
withList: "A";"B". `Prints A and then B`

`Example with loadGlobal`
`If a useful result is returned, that is printed as text`
`If not, "My text" (the default parameter value) is printed`
withList: loadGlobal: "https://example.com".
```

These two examples might seem nice and somewhat boring, but they did not work as intended in the last version ([2020.06.06](2020.06.06.md)).
That is because in some cases (for example when the load request timed out), the "load" functions did not just return `void` when no result was found - they also produced an ugly-looking error message and showed it to the user, even though the app would continue to work just fine.

Since this bug was fixed, there will be no more obstructing and bad-looking error messages just because resource access failed - again, this can be handled quite well by the language.

## The app build script built some apps twice
Kalzit apps are not supported natively by any browser, and that support is also not going to be there soon.
This means that in order to run a Kalzit app, it has to be converted to a "normal" web page (using a combination of HTML, CSS and JavaScript on the client side) which is then interpreted by the browser.

Here comes the interesting part: With the Kalzit project, there are two ways to achieve this.
1. You can let the server do the work. Whenever a file with the `.k` file extension is requested it is automatically converted to a HTML page.
2. You can create the HTML version of your app yourself by running a simple command, which reduces the work the server has to do and makes the app open faster.

In case you are wondering about how you can build the HTML version yourself: Just open a Terminal window, go to the Kalzit main folder, and run `./cli build apps`.
(The `./cli` command is new in this version - if you want to learn more about it, [here you go](#command-line-interface-for-common-tasks)).

This app building utility had a little problem in the last version: For many apps it detected, it would perform the HTML building twice, or in some cases even more times.
Because of that, the process would take much longer than it needed to. With this version that issue was fixed, so you can now build your apps much quicker.

## Empty redirect files broke the server
The Kalzit server supports a feature called "redirect files". They can be easily explained by a little example:
Say you have an HTML file somewhere on your disk: `/Path/to/your/nicePage.html`.
Now, you want to make that file accessible under this URL: `http://localhost:5000/fancy`, where `localhost` is your Kalzit server.
This could be done by moving the file to that location, but that is not always a good idea. You might want to keep that HTML file where it was.

To solve your problem you could add a file called `fancy.redirect` to the Kalzit root folder.
In there, you can write the location you want the server to go to: `/Path/to/your/nicePage.html`.
Now, when the server gets the request to show `http://localhost:5000/fancy`, it will see that redirect, check where it points to, and serve that file. So you can see your HTML page!

This might seem nice in theory and it has also helped me very much in practice, but as you might have guessed, there was a problem with it in the last version:
If a redirect file was empty, it broke the functionality of the entire redirect feature.
To prevent this from happening, there is now a check for empty redirect files - you get warned when the server finds them, and they are ignored.

# Improvements
## Removed many old, useless or deprecated APIs
This is part of a continuous effort to make the project easier to understand and use.
It is really important that the APIs of Kalzit are easy to use and working, especially before a significant number of people has started using the project.
So, while it might seem silly to worry about old APIs now, it is probably the right thing to do.
With this version, many APIs were removed or completely rewritten.
I want to mention two particular ones here:

### JavaScript transpiler
At one time during development, I thought it was a good idea to transpile Kalzit code to JavaScript.
The benefits seemed obvious: Potentially faster speeds and less code to maintain (the entire runtime part could have been removed).
However, it turned out that this did not work - not even in theory.
Kalzit actually *needs* a custom runtime to do its job well - for example, features like variable listeners and automatic string-to-function conversions are just not present in JavaScript.

This means that the idea of a Kalzit-to-JavaScript transpiler was scrapped, and all libraries associated with it were removed.

### Skinning
As you might have noticed by running the [images app](/apps/igDemo.k), apps written in Kalzit can look rather good without much effort.
One reason for this is that you can set color-based themes, with some code like this: `applyTheme: colorCombinationTheme: redColorCombination.`
This line will cause your entire app to adopt a theme based on the color red, which is made to look nice in light- and dark-mode.

If you are not happy with the theme, you can customize your UI elements, for example by using annotations like `@(backgroundColor green) uiElement` or `@(pxWidth 200) uiElement`.
Additionally, it is planned to allow the use of custom CSS stylesheets if you want to have even more control over your UI.

Before the idea of themes existed in Kalzit, there was the concept of "skinning". When a UI element was created, a special "skin function" would be called for it.
For example, if you used `uiTextareaVariableOnchange: $myVar`, the function `uiSkinTextarea` would be called automatically.
This behavior was intended to create a uniform look for all UI elements.

However, this did not work well with things like changes from light-mode to dark-mode.
Many elements stayed in their dark or light variant (some did not even have a dark variant) and did not update, leading to an ugly application.
So, because there are better ways now to achieve a uniform look, these skinning functions have been removed.

## Central utilities folder
There are many features in Kalzit, and many of them can be used from the terminal.
Let me show you two little examples that applied to the previous version. This might help you to understand the problem that existed:

1. To start the server, you had to navigate to the `nodejs/files` folder and run `bash run.sh`
2. To build your app, you had to navigate to the main project folder and run `bash buildApps.sh`

As you can see, these utilitiy scripts - some of which are really important, like the one to start the server - were not placed at a predictable location.
So, if you wanted to know *if* a certain utility existed, or if you wanted to know *where* it was, you did not have many good options.

In this version, many changes were made to make it easier to find and use utilities.
One of these changes is the central [utilities folder](/utilities).
It is a central place for all of those helper scripts, including the ones above.

This has one major benefit: You instantly know where to look for helper scripts.
You want to get to a utility script you have never used before? It will probably be in the utilities folder.

For those interested, there is also a new [command-line interface](#command-line-interface-for-common-tasks) to make using these utilities easier.

## Better installer
There are many ways to install software. Two common ones are:

* Download the installer and run it (usually by clicking on it, very common for Windows)
* Run a terminal command (very common for Linux)

The first option was already present in the last few releases of Kalzit, but the second one was not.
So with this release, you do have the option to easily install Kalzit from the Terminal.
But before trying it, please understand that *this is an untested feature and things might go wrong. Pleae use this feature - and the entire Kalzit project - at your own risk.*

Having said that, here is the terminal command that should work: `curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/triploit/Kalzit/master/utilities/installer/main.sh | sh`.
This should install Kalzit in the folder you navigated to with the terminal.
If you run the command from `/a/folder`, Kalzit would be installed to `/a/folder/Kalzit`.

There are two other parts of the new installer which I want to point out (again, they are untested):

### Central logic
The main installer script is now placed in exactly one location.
This is used by the terminal installer, by the installer for Linux and by the installer for macOS.

Previously, the installers for Linux and macOS implemented the installing routine in their own places.
This meant that when the installer needed an update, two scripts needed to be changed.

With this release, there is only one script that needs updating whenever the main installation process changes, which should make the installer much easier to maintain.

### Predictable output folder
Kalzit will now always be installed to a folder named `Kalzit`, instead of something like `Kalzit_gh3`.
This certainly does not sound very spectacular, but it does have some benefits. Yay!

## More API documentation
One goal for the next big release is the complete documentation of the standard API.
With this version, the project is one step closer to that goal.

Newly documented APIs are:
* BitChute (a video platform)
* "deprecated" and "useInstead" (commonly used annotations)

# New features
Here comes the more interesting stuff!
This release of Kalzit includes two big new features, which I would like to highlight.
Starting with the first one:

## HTTP 304 "not modified" support
There are lots of techonolgies which you can use to build websites.
As an example, a very common way for getting web content from a server to a client is the HTTP protocol (hyper-text transfer protocol).

Kalzit relies on that protocol to serve web applications and other kinds of websites to you.
In the past, that worked in a very straight-forward way: You could request a website, and the Kalzit server would send it to you.

However, it turned out that this approach had the potential to be very slow for bigger sites.
As an example, if you requested an image file, that image would have to be served *every time* you wanted to access it.
So, if an app used that image in multiple different places, or if you reloaded the page with the image on it, the image data would be sent all over again - making the entire page slow.

The good news is that the HTTP protocol does provide a solution for this problem.
Using the status code `304`, the server can basically say "hey, that file did not change since you last requested it - just use what you have already".
This status can be sent *instead* of the file content in a lot of cases. And as you might imagine, a simple number takes much less time to send than an entire document, image or video.

Because of these benefits, the Kalzit server does now use the 304 status code in a lot of places.
I want to highlight two things about this feature in particular:

### File serving APIs
There are new APIs for serving files now.

One of them (`httpWriteGlobalFile`) is for sending files that might change later, but which should be cached by the client.
This is helpful for files which do not change regularly, like the Kalzit web applications. The server can just serve them once, and then the client knows what to do. That can save a lot of bandwidth and make the apps much faster to load.

The second one (`httpWriteStaticFile`) is for sending files that will never change. For these files, the client does not even need to request the file from the server again later - which makes the results even faster than `httpWriteGlobalFile`.

Here is a quick usage example, implementing a small file server using `httpWriteGlobalFile`:
```
($_request fun {
	`We need to get the requested file name - the dot means it should be`
	`relative to the current folder (Kalzit home folder)`
	$wantedFile = "." + $url propOf _request.
	
	!if (fileIsFile: wantedFile) {
		_request httpWriteGlobalFile wantedFile.
	}. !else {
		`Send a blank 404 (not found) page`
		($startServing propOf _request): fileMime: "html".
		($respondCode propOf _request): 404.	
	}.
	
	do:($endServing propOf _request).
}) httpServer 1234.

`Access the server like this: http://localhost:1234/stuff.txt`
```

### User data API endpoints (cookieJson)
The server APIs which all apps can use to synchronize user data have also been updated to use 304 codes when they are appropriate.
Basically, if the user restarts an app and has not changed any data since the last app start, the program should launch a bit faster now.

## Command-line interface for common tasks
When starting the Kalzit project, the main idea was to create an easy way to create rich web applications.
And the initial versions really were rather simple.
There was just one problem: this simplicity came from the fact that the project was extremely limited.
It is kind of like the between a standard text editor and an office suite - of course the text editor is easier to use, but only because it is more limited.

Since the project has grown quite a bit since the start of development, there is now an essential problem which needs to be solved:
How can a complex project be made *easier* to use, but *without removing features*?

One part of the answer to that question is a command-line utility which allows you to do common things.
To give you a better understanding of why a command-line tool was added, let me quickly explain what it was like in previous versions:

In the previous versions, many little helper scripts existed.
They were not put in any unified place and not accessible in a unified way.
So, if you wanted to use one of these tools, you would probably not even find it - and thus not be able to use it.

This version of Kalzit tries to solve that problem.
One part of that is the [utilities folder](#central-utilities-folder), which puts most of those tools in a single place.
But there still needs to be a way to *easily use* the tools.
Of course, some people might be fine with running something like `bash ./utilities/cli/run/server.sh`, or `bash ./utilities/cli/run/nodeApp /path/to/a/file.k`.
However, that is not exactly pretty to look at, and you have to remember all those folder names.
So there is now a better solution: You can navigate your terminal to the Kalzit folder, and run the `./cli` command from there.

The `./cli` command provides a simple command-line interface for the mentioned common tasks.
By just running it without any arguments, you can easily start the Kalzit server.
If you want to start an app after that - say the `igDemo` app - you can do this: `./cli start app igDemo`.
Then, if you are done and want to stop the server, just run `./cli stop server` to do so.

As you can see, there is now an easy way to do the most common things you might want to do with Kalzit from the terminal.

# Plans for the next versions
* Release "4.4" will contain many new APIs and a bit of other stuff that might seem a little random and is not directly related to any other plans
* Releases "4.5" and below "5.0" will attempt to polish many existing features (Scrollbars, Accessibility, Documentation layout, etc.) to make the project more appealing
* Release "5.0" will be the next bigger release, which adds mainly "marketing material" (icons, screenshots, maybe demonstration videos, how-to documents, ...) to make new and casual users aware of Kalzit features - it might also change the versioning system
* Release "5.1" will add many HTTPS-specific APIs (location services, for example)
* Release "5.2" will attempt to make standalone apps run on any server (you do not need to run Kalzit on the server side)

Of course, these plans are just plans, so they might change in the future.
Anyway, thank you for reading this changelog - it means that you are interested in this project, which is great.
I hope you have fun with it. Have a nice day!