#  Plans for release "4.x"

At the time of writing this (June 6, 2020), 4.x is the name for all minor releases which will follow [this one](/docs/future/4.3.md).
The purpose of all of them should be to implement [the plans for the next big version of Kalzit](/docs/future.md).

The following steps (and probably some other ones) will help to achieve that:

## Create an update script
Kalzit was made much more simple to install in the last version - you can just download an installer application and click on it - but that is not true for updates.
If you are trying to update Kalzit, the best you can do is clone from GIT (which is very awkward for users who are not developers), or you could just re-install the entire thing (which would remove all of your apps and your account data).
Both of these solutions are not acceptable, so there needs to be a better way to update.

This step will help to implement the [command line tool](/docs/future.md#command-line-tool) and [Tridymite support](/docs/future.md#tridymite-support).

## Create a central installer script
Currently, there are two versions of the Kalzit installer - one for Linux and one for macOS.
Even though they might seem very different, they are mostly doing the exact same thing.
The problem is, if the update process needs to change, these two files need to be edited, tested, and re-distributed.
It would be a lot easier to maintain the installer if there was just one file which contained all the main logic - the Linux and macOS installers could just use that.

Incidentally, this could also allow you to install Kalzit using a command like this:
`curl urlToTheInstallerScript | sh`

This step will not exactly move the project towards any set goal, but it will make it easier to maintain - which is also very important.

## Create a folder for all the utility scripts
The Kalzit project includes many utility scripts.
There is one for creating a new project, one for building all app projects, one for re-building everything (which is useful if you changed a standard library - for what ever reason), one for starting the server, and so on.
If all of these exist, they should also be relatively easy to find - how could anyone know of their existence otherwise?
So, there should be a folder in the project root which collects all of these utility scripts.

This will help to implement the [command line tool](/docs/future.md#command-line-tool).

## Implement Markdown-based library documentation
The Kalzit programming language has a feature which allows you to access documentation comments at runtime - at least if you are running on the server (not as a web app).
Because of that, it was relatively easy to create a little webpage which allows you to see the documentation for a given function (you can get there by opening the [docs app](/apps/docs/docs.k) and clicking on a name).

But there is a problem: Many APIs are written in JavaScript, which does not provide any way to get documentation about functions at runtime.
Because simply not providing easy access to the documentation of these functions, there should be an alternative way to create documentation content.

Since the Markdown language is already used for other documentation files in Kalzit (like this one), it would make sense to be able to a Markdown files for a named value, which would then be shown if the documentation for that value is requested.

This would obviously help to achieve the [full documentation fo the standard library](/docs/future.md#standard-library-documentation).
